What's wrong with that? There it goes. Okay, so you
were part of the occupation forces. That's right.
Anyhow, you know we acquired the Virgin Islands
from Denmark, $13 million, the three islands, St.
John, St. Thomas, and St. Croix. And we were
stationed in the old gendarme barracks there. As I
said, I commanded the 21st Company in St. Croix. I
was post-treasurer, acting assistant
quartermaster, and I was also the judge advocate.
I didn't get that down there. Okay. How many men did
you have under your command then when you left as a
captain? A Marine company in those days was 100
men.
In this occupation force, it was the 21st Company
and the 149th Company and a... a detachment of
artillery and a detachment of signal and all that
was assigned over there on our island. How'd you
get along with the people in the Virgin Islands?
Uh, good and bad. I guess, uh, of course I was a
Marine. I didn't fraternize with the natives and
uh, I just tended my own business, and I had a lot to
tend to, because as you can notice, they loaded me
up with assignments. You had a lot of jobs. How'd
you do all of these things? Well, they said they
wanted to docinate me well in the Marine Corps and
give me a chance for the experience. All right. I
returned to the States, and I... I, uh... resigned
to be the captain in 1920. But I remembered well
what General Pershing had to say, that if they'd
have left a million men in Germany, they'd never
have another world war.
But they didn't do that. So immediately shortly
thereafter, I became re-affiliated with Marine
Corps and was appointed a captain of the Marine
Corps reserve. And I served, as I say, in many
assignments, active duty for training each year,
attended schools, Jackson, Barrack, New
Orleans, where we studied the draft act and
promoted to major. I didn't go in detail all these
different assignments, Could you describe the
reserve organization during the inter-year
wars? Could you describe what it was like to be a
reserve in 1920? Oh, there was no such thing. I
wasn't a reserve officer in World War I. I was a
regular officer. I know that, but after you
left... Yeah. First, could you tell me, did you
ever think about staying in the Marines as a
profession, as a career in 1920? Yes, I did. Why
didn't you? The reason I wanted to stay was I had a
brother back here who was bugging me to get out
because he said he wanted me to go in business with
him. He had had some oil leases up in McCullough
County and was in show business and had a well, an
outfit to clean oil wells and so forth and so on. I
didn't want to get out of the Marine Corps at all,
period. But anyhow. You enjoyed being a Marine. I
enjoyed being a Marine. I didn't want to get out of
the Marine Corps at all, but he reminded me that he
helped me through college and so forth, and I owed
him something, which I felt I didn't. However, I
regret that I didn't turn my back on and could have
stayed in the Marine Corps and didn't. But
however, I became affiliated, and I don't regret
that. It created a lot of inconvenience, but I
didn't care anything about that either. Okay, so
in 1920, you came back to Houston then? Came back to
Houston. Okay. I built the building out in Fifth
Ward for my brother, a theater. A theater. Which
one? Well, it's called the Roxson Theater. That
was way back down there. But it was in the
neighborhood where they had whites and blacks and
everything like that, and I hated show business. I
didn't want anything like that because I had
worked for the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
and I served in the ring corps with honor. and all
like that, and I didn't like the show business,
didn't like it at all. You didn't like the people in
show business, or what didn't you like about it? I
didn't want show business. I wanted something
else. Yeah, I was trained in agriculture. I had
dreams of being an agriculturist on a large scale.
Yeah. And all of that, but there I was. But anyhow, I
went on that on, and then a little bit later on, I got
in the knack of business with him and accumulated a
little property. What kind of agribusiness? What
kind of what? What kind of business? Real estate.
Oh, real estate business. That's right. In
Houston here. Acquiring real estate, rental
property and things like that. Later on... This is
during the 1920s then. 2030s up in there. I was
licensed as a lawyer in 32. Okay, well, tell me
about why did you decide to go to law. Did you go to
law school or did you study law? Tell me about how
did you become a lawyer? Well, in the Marine Corps,
every officer was a law officer. Every officer
could be a judge advocate. Every officer could be a
incidental. That's one of the things we learned in
Marine Corps schools. You could be a recorder on a
summary court. You could run a summary court. You
could be a prosecutor. We've taught all that.
Every Marine officer's loss and every Marine
officer aboard a battleship was the judge
advocate who ran all the courts aboard ship. So
they taught it back in the school.
Becoming a lawyer was a matter that I had become
involved with my brother and he was We'd acquired
something and it was questioned. Anyhow, about
that time I had put my wife in dental school. When
did you get married?
I got married twice. I got a child by prior
marriage. One daughter, she's got five
daughters, lived down in Louisiana. But I've been
married to this woman since 1927, I think it is.
Anyhow, So I went to the South Texas School of Law
down in YMCA and I realized that being over that
couple of months that I'd had a lot of experience in
business, I'd had a lot of experience in court work
in the Marine Corps, and I decided I didn't have any
time to waste sitting around listening to people
reciting class. So I went to the Houston Law School
where they threw the course at you in three years,
summer and winter, and then you took the bar
examination and you took it from there. So you
passed the bar in 1932. It is, okay.
But being a lawyer in the Marine Corps helped me
quite a bit, too. How? It enhanced, because they
figured lawyers could make decisions. They
figured lawyers could reason things out. They
figured lawyers could do a lot of things. And a lot
of our commanding generals were lawyers. My
General Vogel was a lawyer, a graduate of George
Washington. And General Price was a lawyer. All of
them, but they had had that training. So as I say,
when I... So I said, I said many a time that I could do
the training, and he tended to say, all right. Now,
let's get back... That's when, that's where I
realized... as I do today, the importance of
bringing the draft back immediately. Because
that's where you get a cross-section of
everybody. And before long, Reagan is going to
have to give up because... Give up what? What do you
mean? Give up on the draft. Have to give up on it. I
believe in the draft. I believe we have to have a
cross-section of all people. You understand? You
just can't have...
So in other words,
you support the draft. I support the draft more so
after I went and took this course in Jackson
Barracks. Okay, okay. Tell me about that course.
Well, the course was... You know, the draft act was
set up in World War I by the Honorable Andrew
Johnson, who was head of the National Recovery
Act. And we had five of his administrators there
teaching us how to administer the act, what to look
for, how to pick out homosexuals, and all of those
kind of things. And how to administer the act when
time came and all like that. And the executive
officer of that school, believe it or not, was
Major Hussey. He had been shot in one eye in France,
who later became head of the draft until he died. I
was always wanting to know what he thought about
me. He gave me a good fitness report. We attended
this with five regular marine officers and five
reserve officers. General Hershey did? No, no,
no, no. Marines going to this school at Jackson
Barracks. National Guard, Army, Navy, Coast
Guard, everything. Everybody was going, okay.
Right. Okay. And he told me, and I didn't know he was
going to put it in my record at the time I... of an
emergency in time of war that I'd be better off in
the field with commanding men than I would be
trying to administer this act in some state
capital. I thought it was quite an honor. Sure. But
I didn't want that, but anyhow, I had the knowledge
about the draft. Okay, good. Where were we now? No,
I wanted to, when did you join, when did you get
involved with the reserves? When I was
recommissioned. Okay, when were you
recommissioned?
In 1920, you resigned, and then when did you get
back in as a Marine Corps Reserve? See what that
commission is right there. 1927. Okay, 1927. So
you got out of the service in 1920, and then you went
back in 1927. Yeah, but that commission dated on.
It really was 1926. That's how I don't match the
material. Okay, 1926. But it all during that time
that I was around Marines here in Houston. Mm-hmm.
And
we had a camaraderie... Well, we met all
ex-Marines.
We had the McLemore Detachment of the Marine Corps
League. There's a medal sitting over yonder if you
want to take a look at it. There, right there.
There, down there.
So I really never ceased being a Marine. Right. And
what was it like? Did you get paid being in the
Marines when you went back in in 1926, 27? Yes,
every time I went on active duty I got paid. And did
you go on active duty on the weekends? No, no, no,
no, no. Those days there was no organized reserve.
Okay, tell me about that. The only time we got paid
is when we went on active duty for training. So we
went to Quantico, Virginia, and a lot of times I'd
join a battalion that's going to be...
What were we talking about? Well, we were talking
about what it was like to be in the Marine Corps
Reserves. And you were talking about if they paid
you, or we were talking about paying and going on.
Did you go for, like, two-week summer camps? Yeah.
Okay, and that's when the Marines paid you. But
otherwise, when you just met, they didn't pay. Is
that correct? No. Okay, and how often did you meet?
You mean the... Did I take that down? What did I do? I
have this right here. Where's my copy? Here, use
that one. Oh, no, no, no, hell no. Goddamn, I'm
nuts, you know. Yeah. Oh, okay, there it
is. I had put in to have a reserve company in
Houston, a reserve battalion. But I wasn't strong
politically, and they gave it to the Honorable
Clark Thompson down in Galveston, who was kin to
the Moody's and all like that, so he had the 15th
Battalion.
Okay, so you didn't get the battalion, or you
didn't get the reserve unit yourself? No, I did
not. I went to Galveston and called the 15th
Battalion. Okay. Under Clark Thompson, who was
the son-in-law of the Moody's, and had been an
ex-Congressman, or was going to be a Congressman.
So were you in his unit? No, I was never in his unit,
only for training in the summertime. We went to
Palacios, we went to, where the
hell was that place, Beauregard in Louisiana, and
we went to, oh, various other places where they
would meet. One time we went as far as Quantico,
Virginia. Really? Yeah. Anyhow, but as I say, I
went on and did my training and did what I was
supposed to do. And I was promoted to major after
taking the professional examination in 1940. And
the funny thing about that, I received a letter
from an Aggie by the name of Walker later on got to be
a lieutenant general, and I used to haze him in B
Company at A&M College. Oh, really? And he wrote me
a letter and said, you are qualified physically,
educationally, morally, but not
professionally. And unless you complete certain
work within a certain time, we will have to retire
you from the Marine Corps Reserve. So I wrote to
Marine Corps school and found out what I had to do
and what they wanted. And I went down to Gauss to a
friend of mine who was inspecting instructors,
Lieutenant Colonel down there, Marines who had
served with him in the tropics, Colonel Holmes,
and he schooled me about three months. And then he
announced me ready and I went down and took the
professional examination and I was made a major
shortly thereafter. But the only thing, I was glad
I took the course because it made me
professionally fit. And they gave me all the
courses, they gave me the works, and I took it.
Later on I found out other people had been made
major without taking the examination, but also in
my own mind felt that I was better off than they were
because I was qualified enough for what I was doing
than they were not. And what did these courses deal
with? What type of topics? Small wars, the machine
gun and defense, the machine gun and attack, the
oceanography,
ship to shore movements, techniques and tactics,
artillery and defense, and
logistics, and...
writing orders for an attack, and carrying
a campaign from its inception, the intelligence
part of it, and this, that, and the other, until you
brought it right to the combination where either
one of you lost supplies and all that,
transportation. And as I say, it gives a full
course on small wars, which we fought in the
tropics in Haiti and San Domingo and Nicaragua.
There's another thing I was interested in, and
that was, were you building a law practice in
Houston while you were being a reserve officer
then? Well, we stopped there, and as I say, I opened
a law office in the Shell building. and had my other
real estate and theater interests, too. And I was
associated with T.J. We represented mortgage
loan bank at T.J. Bettison. Incidentally, I
became associated with an Aggie by the name of
Frank R. Gwynn, whose father came up there at Russ,
Texas. And he was a fifth generation lawyer, and
he's a fine lawyer. That was mostly my practice,
mortgage loan, probate work, and little
corporation work, and very little criminal work.
Now, you were promoted to major in June of 1940. Can
you tell me what happened then? All right. Soon
after that, just prior
to this appointment, I had been out in San Diego
with the 15th Battalion, and when I arrived home, I
had orders on my desk asking me to organize a Marine
Battalion in Houston. Bet you were happy about
that. Yes, well I tried, and I had got two companies
together, and they made us come on to active duty,
and they joined and merged into 2nd Battalion, 8th
Marines, I got a whole lot of damn pictures on that
in there, of the troops. I said, you could just go
on, hell, how damn it be that much. Nobody wants to
read that much. You want to be brief, concise, just
like the book I had, which I loaned a fellow, the
generals after Appomattox. It went along there,
it said about Lawrence Sullivan Ross and all that.
He did so many things, but hell, he got it all
condensed down. I understand all that. I said, we
could just look, pile it that high. Okay. Now, what
did you do in the Battalion 8th Marines? Tell me
about that. What were your functions and duties
there? In the 2nd Battalion 8th Marines,
my outfit just went to the 2nd Battalion 8th
Marines, and immediately, as a major, they had no
room for me, so I went up to the regimental staff as a
law officer and personnel and so forth and so on.
See? Sure. Additional duty as a member of the
general court martial down in the Navy District.
So you took care of the legal work then? Sure, I drew
up wills, but I was in personnel. Right. Sure. See?
I was in personnel. All right. That was in the 8th
Marines. And then later on, the 8th Marines shut
off. I transferred all my activities to the 2nd
Marine Division, which I didn't put in here.
Mm-hmm. See, then I went to the Corps, the Corps
staff when I'm back, and that's where I was when
they took me away from that staff to send me to Samoa
because I'll tell you why. Okay. But when did you go
active duty? When did you change from a reserve?
December, when they called us in December 1940.
Okay, December 1940, you went active duty. Were
you happy to be back on active duty? Of course, I
left my business and everything else, but that
didn't make any difference to me. I was happy. I
just turned my stuff over to other people and
whatever they did with it, they put the money in
their pocket, whatever they did, that was that.
That didn't make any difference. Because the
reason I always was affiliated, because I always
knew that what Pershing said was true. They would
have another war unless we leave a million men in
Germany. The truth would be right. All right. So
you thought you'd be going back, and you thought
the United States would be certainly going back?
Sure. Okay, into the war. You had Hitler, and you
had all that stuff. And I will say one thing about, I
belonged to the America's Club here in Houston,
which was a bunch of Italian, people of Italian
parentage, professionals. And they were always
bragging about Mussolini. But one day I got up and
made a speech that was very unpopular I said that
the Romans gave us our laws and out of those laws we
bolded a constitution and we developed one of the
greatest countries in the world, the United
States of America. Yet where this law emanated,
back in Italy, they had to resort to dictatorship
which would fall, which would fall. That same year
I went to St. Louis on a Marine, American Legion
convention. I went with a fellow named Chido who
was going to be decorated by the Italian
government and went up to the Italian council up in
some building in St. Louis. And he had a picture of
Mussolini and it was blowing out from the wall. And
this guy said, oh, look how great a man he is. And I
said, he's just full of wind. That wind is blowing
him away from the wall. The fellow I was with who's
going to get this decorated, stepped on my foot. He
says, can't you be a gentleman? I said, I'm only
telling the truth, and I knew what was going to
happen, and it did happen.
All right. So when you went in December 1940, you
were active duty again, and tell me what you did.
You went to San Diego then? That's right. Okay. I
went to San Diego, and that's where the
headquarters of the The 1st and 8th Marines
Regiment, and then the 2nd Marine Division, then
the One-Eyed Mac. And what is the One-Eyed Mac?
What does that mean? That meant the outfit that was
going to run Guadalcanal Show. Oh, okay. That was
the code of it. Okay. But I was taken away from that
staff and sent to... Samoa. Samoa. and joined the
brigade down there in American Samoa. Was that
1942? Yeah. That was the idea was to support the
Tarawa operation. That was the idea of
reactivating those islands there, American
Samoa, Western Samoa, and the Wallace Island,
which is the French Samoa. And I was the first and
only Marine officer in American Samoa to support
Tarawa operation. What did you do there at Samoa?
Wait a minute. When I arrived there, I went out to
brigade to see my friend, my commanding general,
who I'd served with in the Marines, and another
friend of mine, Raymond Knapp. And I asked him, why
did you all take me away from General Vogel? And he
said, well, the attorney general has been held on
this island for many years by our Navy people. And
they're so soft, they have never talked to me. the
people how to work on these islands. And we were
looking for a lawyer, we were looking for a
southerner, we were looking for an
administrator, we were looking for a marine.
Because the guy who's coming here, although he is a
marine, he's a graduate of the Naval Academy, and
we don't think much of him. So he tapped me. So the
commanding... Why do you want a southerner? Why do
you say, I want a southerner? That's what they
said.
Because a lot of them people were black, too.
Anyhow, that's what they said. I don't mean to, you
know, I don't want to stuff anything. You can
delete that if you want. I don't care. So, I was the
first and only Marine officer serving the 10th
General and Pro-War Marshals and the Military
Governor of Samoan and the Samoan Defense
Brigade. See reports on tenure of Officer of the
Water and Navy Accommodation Medal with ribbon
for said service. OK, General Nunn. Tell me what
you did in Samoa. I'm OK right now. OK, good. I want
to know what you did in Samoa.
Okay, that's your Samoa file.
Okay. There's some material there to start a book
with. Anyhow, the idea was my commanding general
told me that they wanted, as the attorney general
for Oklahoma Marshal, I was executive officer of
the naval government. Executive officer. I
signed my name to 22 different titles. No kidding?
All right, I was the lawyer, the high lawyer,
attorney general, who was executive officer of
the government.
The Provo March was a Samoan area, all in combined,
but all they gave it to me, they said, you got the law
west of the Pecos, take it all. I was a V.C. officer
for the State Department. I'd get permits to the
Line Islands for a sewer. I was officer of the Navy
Bank in Samoa. I was head of the Labor Board. I was
head of the, I was on the Custom Board. I was warden
of the Naval Prisons. I was warden of the native
prison. I was head of tax collecting. I was head of
tax assessment. I was head of the Department of
Agriculture. I was head of the Department of
Native Industries, like that thing you see over
there on the wall, that club thing like that. I was
head of the Department of Native... I was legal
representative of the island government. I was a
prosecutor in the criminal court. I had power
adoption. I was a trustee for the Mormon Ranch. I
was area assignment security officer. I was head
of the liquor control board. I was a brand major,
which means a fire marshal. And I was on the
hospital board. You did all of that? I did that. I
had 22 different battles. 22. Did you ever have
time to sleep? Damn little. Damn little. All
right, for my service, I don't mind being
braggadocious about it, but there is my, there are
my annual reports for my two years, practically
two years of tenure of office. There they are right
there. Where we go into a whole lot of stuff. The
Native industry. Tell me how you got along with the
Samoan people. I got along with Samoan people
because I was firm and I was fair. When I set up the
labor board, I meant no partiality. I had power to
appoint the governors from the four districts.
And these four districts came from Samoan. And we
operated through the chief. And I well remember
the first speech I made. My commanding general
told me to go down there and look at the laws. They
were in existence, change any of them by direction
to suit the job, get on with the war so that the
natives could cooperate, so our Marines could go
on in training instead of unloading ships. And so
the Navy was sitting down there expecting to build
a Navy base, which never happened, and they never
unloaded any ships. So the idea was to get us there,
get the natives to do the work, work unloading
ships, work on the roads, and do things so that
Marines and other people could be released and get
on with the training. Didn't they do the work? All
this stuff, these are the annual reports. Did the
Samoans do the work? The Samoans did their work.
They never had anybody's bad eye on them because
the Navy had what they called a feeder-feeder
guard there. And through that feeder-feeder
guard, which was formed in 1904, They lived, the
whole island. They didn't have to work. They just
sat down and fished and grow taro and this, that,
and the other. They didn't have to do any work. They
didn't have to work. The sea was full of fish.
So how'd you get them to take over these new duties
now? I'm sure I'll tell you in a minute.
So on my way back from brigade headquarters, I
stopped at my military police headquarters to
announce them that I was their new provost
marshal. I was at Utilee, so I had an office down
there, too.
Feet of field guard, you can have that. Those are
the people whose salaries filtered through every
native community and family on the island.
Feeder, feeder, put it on back there. Feeder,
feeder, go. F-I-T-E, F-I-T-E. All right.
Here, you can have this.
How'd you get the people to take over work? So when I
reported, I was immediately assigned a jeep.
The Attorney General had a station wagon. I said, I
didn't want that.
I went down to this office of the Attorney General.
And the first person I saw was a barefooted Samoan
with a shark lay around his neck, barefooted and a
lava lava. So I said to him, what's your job? He
says, I'm your chief of police. My name is Paley.
Paley means strong in Samoan. So I said to him, I am
the attorney general. I'm your lawyer, Celia
Celia, and I'm the provost of Marquis Island. And I
understand by reading that we have chiefs in the
different districts. And I want those chiefs to
have as many people of their villages in this
courtroom tomorrow morning.
So as Bush telegraphed word from one to the other,
The next morning, the courtroom was filled up, and
I got up and made them a speech. And I told them I
didn't ask for this duty. But the war was on, and we
had to reorganize and disrupt their easy life
where they could sleep all day and fish when they
wanted to and grow breadfruit. And now the women do
all the washing, and they said we had to go to work.
We had to protect this country. If they want to do a
part, in this Japanese war so they could win it.
They'd have to change their lives, which I
apologize very much for disrupting it. And we have
to change things. Everybody's gonna work on this
island. Everybody's gonna produce. We're gonna
set up a labor board. Those who are physically
qualified are gonna have to work on the roads
You're going to have to keep up your own
plantation. You're going to have to cut off the
food supply. We cannot be bringing food down from
the United States for you people when you can grow
it here yourself. We're going to cut off a lot of
other supplies, shoes and things and other that
you get out of San Francisco. We're going to have to
cut that off the, you know what I'm talking about,
the list. And we're going to bring down warm
material. We're going to bring down concrete.
We're going to bring down materials, cement, and
other materials to win the war with. And you're
going to have to learn to live what you've got. And
I'm going to only let necessities come to this
island. What'd they say? They didn't say
anything. I told them that was it. So I got through
talking to them. The next morning, we had all the
natives that could be physically able to work, all
the men, report for physical examination. And the
next morning, they went to work. We had trucks go
out into the areas and pick them up. And we taught
them how to unload ship. We taught them how to be a
winchman. We taught them how to do this, how to drop
the slings in the hole and all like that. I
cooperated with the supply officer, who was a Navy
man. I also issued an order immediately that
instead of having one sling down in the hole and
unload the ship, we're going to have four slings.
And as the law officer of the island aboard ship,
they had four rules. No stealing, no sleeping, no,
let's see, sleeping, stealing,
drinking, and I had one else. So we set to work, and
first thing you know, these people went to work
seriously about it. And we used the feet of feet of
guards as guards on these ships. Everybody that
came on there had to have a ticket. No sleeping, no
smoking, no stealing. It was another asshole. I
forget what it was. But anyhow, at any time anybody
violated that, the feet of feet of guards brought
him in, and I would prosecute him. And rather than
put him in jail, I'd fine him. And I built up
$300,000 or $30,000 in the hospital fund on those
fines. Anyhow, I could hold court any time. The
court consisted of one naval lieutenant
commander and three native judges. We had no jury,
so I'd write out the complaint. They'd come in and
give me the complaint. I'd write it out. If there
was any merit to it, I'd go on and prosecute. If it
wasn't, I'd give them a warning and go on about
their business. As I say, I gave you all the duties.
I had the power of adoption. And I found out then
that those natives had more sense than we do
because they'd bring in a family who had eight
children. They wouldn't adopt just one child.
They'd adopt every other child so the kids could be
raised together. Those were natives. Anyhow, my
citation there, I won't. I did a job there, and I was
the last, first and last Marine officer to ever
hold that job because the military, the
government, after I left there, went from the
military government to the Samoan Defense Area
back to the Navy, and from the Navy it went to the
Department of the Interior, which is down there
now. How'd you like that duty? I didn't like the
duty. Why not? Because it was too... I had... I had
every ship that came in there. I forgot that. Every
ship that came in there, the skipper had to report
to me. And if he was having any difficulties with
the crew, I had power from Admiral Hawes to take him
off and try him or send him back on his own
transportation back to the United States and take
him off the ship. That was some of my jobs. I had a lot
of jobs to do. Did you ever have to do that with any
captain? I did that with two or three people. I got a
file of letters where lawyers wrote me after I went
on inactive duty trying to straight them up and get
their money back, but that didn't mean anything to
me. I catch them stealing or selling whiskey on the
beach, anything like that, and they brought them
in. The skipper would come with the complaint and
bring the defendant there, and then I'd take him
from there.
That was it. But I...
It was a hell of a job. Another thing. Wait a minute.
One of the things I had, I had a leper calling. I
forgot that. Oh, you really? Give me a... Where's
that damn thing? I forgot. Right here. That right
there? No, I don't want that. You
want a pen? Leper calling up on the side of the
mountain. And I also ran the nut house. Crazy
house.
I had a feeder running that. One day he let a damn
crazy guy get in there and drown. And he come
telling me, I said, I just warned you last week. The
ship was very well out of the water, and his name was
Pai Tata. And he hit one of them natives who had a
fake sardine can for a number. And he hit him and
knocked him all down the ladder, and he hit the
other guy. Every step on them buses, they had wide
open. I had to relieve him of that, so I sent him over
to the nut house, and next week he come over, he done
drowned one of those poor crazy people. Oh,
Christ. Well, who was your commanding general
then? Was there a general in charge? There he is
right there, General Henry L. Lawson. Lawson?
That's right. Okay. He married. And so you were his
assistant, more or less. No, this was back in his
assistant. I was his provost and lieutenant
general. He was the military governor. Okay, he
was the military governor. This was back in Guam
where I got the Legion of Merit.
Okay. The... My duties in Samoa are covered by this
citation. Meritorious conduct in the
performance of outstanding service to the
government of the United States as Attorney
General and Provo Marshal of the Military
Government of America of Samoa from July 29, 1942
to the 18th of November, 1943. During this
critical period, he was charged with the
maintaining law and order among military and
civilian personnel, prosecuting all actions
before the court for the island government,
indoctrinating natives with the principles of
war or effort, and numerous additional duties of
importance. His astute diplomacy and
extraordinary administrative and professional
abilities aided materially in fostering a real
consciousness of obligation by the civilians as
well as the military military personnel to the
United States government in time of war. His
conduct was all the time in keeping with the
highest tradition of naval service. That tells
you what my job, what I did. But a lot of people don't
know about all this other stuff. Well, of course,
there's instances I could go on and elaborate and
so forth and so on, you know what I mean? Now... Did
you think that Europe, that you did, that, uh, The
most difficult chore was to getting the Samoan
people to get used to the war effort and all those
changes? They were not. They were for a little
while there, but I had very little resistance
because they knew I was fair and I was stern. Yeah.
Now, a lot of times there's some Marine officer who
comes right in the seat for some native that I had in
the jail. Mm-hmm. So, uh, I'd look at him, I says, do
I ever come over to your 50 caliber group and tell
you how to run your battery? He said, no, sir. I
said, why don't you come over here? I said, you're
doing push-push with the man's sister, you're
right. He said, yes, sir. I said, well, you better
get on over there before I lock you up. So I put him
under arrest as Provo Marshal. I had the military
law, I had the civil law, I had it all. And General
Lawson gave me that. Later on after General Lawson
left, I was under the Samoan Defense Command. And
after that, of course, I was relieved and came on
back to the States. Oh, tell me about that. All
right. Returned to the United States. Why were you
relieved of that duty? Because my time was up. I'd
given them everything. Okay. And I didn't want to
stay there after my commanding general left, who
caught me there. Okay. Okay, fine. I didn't have
any. They knew. They knew what to do. Okay. See, so
they went back to the old ways. Okay. Nonchalant. I
well remember one time. So the Samoans went to the
old ways then? They went different ways. They
bettered themselves, but they were not under the
pressure of war. Okay, fine. I well remember down
there in Samoa that the
airplane tender came in there to take certain
personnel from the 2nd Defense Battalion away,
and I was down on the dock. And the skipper of the
ship was ready to shove off. And he was wanting a
pilot to take him out. So he hollered down at me and
said, who runs this place? I said, no, I don't.
Well, he says, well, this pilot's going to take me
out. I said, well, I think they're out there. He
said, yeah, but I think they're coming back with a
couple of tuna boats. So he yelled from the bridge,
says, you people must think I'm sitting on an
Evinrude motor hill. I'm going to shove off here
myself without a pilot. And with that, he did.
That's right. Anyhow, so much for Samoa. And I
returned to the United States.
And I was legal officer of the Fleet and Marine
Forces San Diego area. And I was a G2, I wanted to put
two and I got, let me get a pencil in here. I got GF, I
mean G2, intelligence. Chief of staff, later
chief of staff, the same.
So you became the chief legal officer then? No, no,
no. That was the first job I had. Okay. Then I was, G2
is intelligence and legal officer. Okay. And then
I was made chief of staff. I had all these other
people under me. Okay, okay. How many men did you
have under you as chief of staff? Well, we had
50,000 people. We had all the people in the San
Diego area. You ought to put San Diego area. Yeah,
you have that. I have. All right. And what rank were
you at this time? I was still a lieutenant colonel.
Okay, a lieutenant colonel. Anyhow, we had Camp
Pendleton, we had Camp Elliott, we had Camp
Gillespie, we had Camp Matthews, we had all these
places under this same outfit. It was commanded by
a general, General Vogel. See, who had me?